FITNESS TIPS FOR MEN

1. Vary Your Fitness Routine
Alternate your exercise activities to stay motivated to work out — variety is good for both the mind and body, said Jim White, RD, spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association, certified health fitness instructor, and owner of Jim White Fitness and Nutrition Studios in Virginia Beach, Va. "Your body can get used to the same thing if it's done over and over again," White said. To keep your body guessing, he suggested combining different types of fitness workouts: Mix up a cardio workout like running with strength training, yoga, and martial arts, or vary your tempo within any one activity through interval training.

2. Find a Fitness Buddy
Do you need extra motivation to stick with your fitness and diet plan? Don't go it alone — enlist the help of a buddy. Not only does working out with a friend keep you both focused on fitness, it also adds an edge of competition, especially if you pick a workout buddy who's a bit more advanced and will make you feel challenged. You'll work harder to keep up and reach your fitness goals.

3.  Keep Cooking Simple
When you're following a healthy diet and cooking at home, make sure your preparation methods are also healthy. Bake, grill, steam, or sauté foods rather than breading and deep-frying them, suggested White. Cook with healthy fats, such as olive or canola oil instead of butter, and season with fresh or dried herbs, not salt. Order food prepared in these healthful ways when you eat out, too.

4. Develop Strength-Training Exercises
Strength training is a key part of any fitness plan, both for variety and to build calorie-burning muscle. You don't have to lift weights or spend hours at the gym — you can tone your muscles at home or at the office just a few minutes at a time. Push-ups are great for working the chest, triceps, and shoulders, said White, and you can do them anywhere. Squats and lunges are also effective because they work multiple muscles and are easy to add to any fitness routine.

5.  Stick With Simple Cardio Workouts
Cardio exercise gets your heart rate up and burns off calories. Running provides a great cardio workout, said White. If you're a beginner, start out slowly by alternating walking and running intervals. You can also burn calories throughout the day by taking a few simple "steps," such as standing up more at work, taking the stairs instead of the elevator, and parking your car farther away from the office. Walk at a brisk pace whenever possible

6. Tweak Your Diet With More Fruits and Vegetables
A healthy diet can be a work in progress. Meat may have been your main staple, but as you improve your health, continually improve your nutrition as well. Find simple ways to fit in more fresh fruits and vegetables and eat less meat. White suggested snacking on celery sticks with peanut butter or carrots with fat-free ranch dip. Other easy ways to improve your diet include bulking up sandwiches with tomatoes and fresh greens, topping whole-wheat pasta with steamed seasonal vegetables, and slicing fruit into your morning cup of yogurt or bowl of cereal. Your food calories will leave you more satisfied as well as help you maintain a healthy weight.

7. Stay Motivated for Fitness
As with diet, sticking with the same fitness plan day in and day out can lose its appeal over time. Taking up a new exercise activity or even a new sport can ramp up your enthusiasm. Always wanted to play golf? Reward your exercise dedication with a few lessons and walk the course to burn calories. Want a relaxing exercise option? Rent a rowboat and spend a few hours on a serene lake. Of course, if you're already doing a fitness activity you truly enjoy, be sure to keep it in your exercise rotation.
